# fanner

Simple, microcontroller-based PWM fan controller.

Has customizable temperature and PWM ranges.

## Requirements

* make
* avr-libc
* avr-gcc
* KiCAD 4+

## Software

### Customize

Open fanner.c in a text editor and adapt the parameters near the top.

The predefined voltages are optimized for the MCP-7900 temperature sensor.

PWM output values depend on the FAN used and require some experimentation.

### Build

```bash
make
```

### Flash

```
make flash
```

### Code

The code heavily relies on compile-time optimiziation and precalculation
of the (linear) transfer function coefficients.

At runtime, only 16-bit multiplication and addition is used to transform
the the values sampled by the AD converter into PWM output values.

The transfer function is a very simple piecewise linear curve, represented
by the formula:

    ADClow := ADC(Tlow) = (Tlow * Ss + Vofs) / Vref * ADCmax
    ADChigh := ADC(Thigh) = (Thigh * Ss + Vofs) / Vref * ADCmax
    D(ADC) := ADC <= ADClow          : Dlow
              ADC >= ADChigh         : Dhigh
              ADClow < ADC < ADChigh : [Vref / ADCmax / Ss * Sd] - [Vofs / Ss * Sd]

Where:

    D    : Output duty cycle (Dlow and Dhigh are the flat parts of the curve) [%]
    Vref : Sensor reference voltage (the voltage corresponding to ADCmax) [V]
    ADC  : Input value from AD converter (ADClow and ADChigh are the values at
           lowest and highest possible temperatures, respectively; ADCmax
           is the value generated by the reference voltage) [1]
    T    : Sensor temperature (with Tlow and Thigh corresponding to the Dlow
           and Dhigh duty cycle values) [°C]
    Ss   : Sensor voltage slope [V/°C]
    Vofs : Sensor offest voltage (voltage at lowest temperature) [V]

To reduce sudden jumps in fan speed, a ramping function is used. The RAMP_DELTA
and RAMP_DELAY parameters allow tuning the ramping speed.

## Electronics

### Design

Use KiCAD version 4 or later.

The board layout is based on THT components for easier building. And because
I had the components lying around in my workshop.

If you want the board in SMD, you have to design it yourself.

### Circuit

The circuit is really simple and just consists of a small microcontroller
(the ATtiny13/A), a voltage regulator (fans usually run on 12V) and some
pin headers for connecting the sensor, power and the fan.

The button and the corresponding pull-up resistor as well as the debouncing
capacitor are optional and currently not used in the example code.

## Copyright

© 2018 Gregor Riepl

PCB design and schematics are licensed under the CERN Open Hardware License 1.2.
Program code is licensed under the Simplified BSD License.

See the accompanying LICENSE-HARDWARE and LICENSE-SOFTWARE files for details.

All other rights are reserved.
